# Optimizing Meal Plans for Nutritional Requirements and Personal Preference

Link to [Dissertation Paper](https://github.com/tep00018/Optimizing-Meal-Plans-for-Nutritional-Requirements-and-Personal-Preference/blob/5b7df6fe4d78c493ae0076b29051117aee78b01c/Optimizing%20Meal%20Plans%20for%20Nutritional%20Requirements%20Dissertation_3038117.pdf)

This project proposes a menu planning optimization tool that constrains for a caloric target and optimizes for nutrients and user ratings. Three bespoke multi-objective optimization algorithms have been developed: [Random Search (RS)](https://github.com/tep00018/Optimizing-Meal-Plans-for-Nutritional-Requirements-and-Personal-Preference/blob/a7a9c5d6c3d25c269451886744c2fbc088058a27/MPP%20Random%20Search%20Algorithm.ipynb), [Genetic Algorithm (GA)](https://github.com/tep00018/Optimizing-Meal-Plans-for-Nutritional-Requirements-and-Personal-Preference/blob/8529fcb3a11cb69c0e7e48c395a794bfce1644b9/MPP%20Genetic%20Algorithm.ipynb), and [Memetic Algorithm (MA)](https://github.com/tep00018/Optimizing-Meal-Plans-for-Nutritional-Requirements-and-Personal-Preference/blob/d137de85650a4d9babb8b4345ecb073ac2791ae1/MPP%20Memetic%20Algorithm.ipynb). These optimization algorithms can further advance a human-in-the-loop personalized recommendation system that learned and adapts to each individual's preferences.

Background:
Globally, we are facing a double epidemic of obesity and malnutrition due to growing trends in unhealthy food consumption. If corrective action is not taken, it is estimated that the incidence of chronic non-communicable diseases will rise significantly. Right now, it is projected that over 12% of adults will be diabetic by the year 2045 resulting in significant losses in productivity and a challenging load for healthcare systems. Playing into this problem is confusion about what comprises a “healthy” diet, a lack of unambiguous information for consumers, and a modern lifestyle that makes change difficult. This global problem is two-fold: too many calories are consumed that comprise too few nutrients. The many and varied number of potential permutations of daily meal options is a challenging optimization problem for computer algorithms. 

Multi-Objective Optimization:
The Menu Planning Problem (MPP) is an NP-Hard problem and consists of finding a set of menu combinations that satisfies some pre-defined objective function(s).  This project proposes a menu planning optimization tool with summary feedback on nutrition to provide customized options to individuals that align with their preferences. The aim is to build a tool that adapts to an individual’s preferences and builds in a healthy bias to meal choices. The output communicates summary nutrition information and flags concerns to the user for corrective action. The main objective is to inform users about their meal plan choices and offer up personalized menu plans for healthier alternatives to enable positive, long-term changes in behavior. 

Benefits:
The potential benefits of this personalized approach are immediate as well as long-lasting improvements to individual health and well-being with the potential for significant global impact in combatting chronic disease.  To accomplish this goal, three bespoke multi-objective optimization algorithms were developed to determine which approach best optimizes for calories, nutrition, and user preference. The following algorithm types were explored: Random Search (RS), Genetic Algorithm (GA) and Memetic Algorithm (MA). Each algorithm has been optimized for performance and then compared using 10 use cases as a proof of concept. The evolutionary algorithms (GA and MA) perform significantly better than the random search with the memetic algorithm performing slightly better than the genetic algorithm in time-constrained tests. The results suggest that it is feasible to have a tool that generates a highly personalized plan in minutes that optimizes for nutrition and taste preferences without the use of costly services, fad diets, or nutritionists.

